manuscript/about-the-book.md, before:

# About The Book

This book is intended to be a hands-on thorough guide for securing web applications based on Node.js and the ExpressJS web application framework. Many of the concepts, tools and practices in this book are primarily based on open source libraries and the author leverages these projects and highlights them.

The main objective of the book is to equip the reader with practical solutions to real world problems, and so this book is heavily saturated with source code examples as well as a high level description of the risks involved with any security topic, and the practical solution to prevent or mitigate it.

Even though ExpressJS is chosen as the case for web application framework, many concepts in this book can, and should be taken into account, and implemented with any other framework. Concepts like *secure code*, *nosql injections*, *secure session management* and others are important security topics and would benefit any Node.js developer whose primary focus is web development.

## Source Code

All the source code examples, and many more variations of them can be found in their complete setup and form in the following GitHub repository inside the *code/* directory [https://github.com/lirantal/nodejssecurity](https://github.com/lirantal/nodejssecurity).

Feedback and comments are highly appreciated and welcome. If you find any issues, improvements, or room for updates please open a GitHub issue or Pull-Request.

Commit message:

chore: update frontmatter, book and author info

manuscript/about-the-book.md, after:

# About The Book

This book is intended to be a hands-on thorough guide for securing web applications based on Node.js and the ExpressJS web application framework. Many of the concepts, tools and practices in this book are primarily based on open source libraries and the author leverages these projects and highlights them.

The main objective of the book is to equip the reader with practical solutions to real world problems, and so this book is heavily saturated with source code examples as well as a high level description of the risks involved with any security topic, and the practical solution to prevent or mitigate it.

Even though ExpressJS is used as the case study for securing a web application framework, all topics presented in this book can, and should be taken into account, and implemented with any other web framework, such as but not limited to Fastify, Hapi, Koa or others.

Concepts like _secure code_, _nosql injections_, _secure session management_ and others are important security topics and would benefit any Node.js developer whose primary focus is web development.

## Source Code

All the source code examples, and many more variations of them can be found in their complete setup and form in the following GitHub repository inside the _code/_ directory [https://github.com/lirantal/nodejssecurity](https://github.com/lirantal/nodejssecurity).

Feedback and comments are highly appreciated and welcome. If you find any issues, improvements, or room for updates please open a GitHub issue, submit a pull request, or contact the author directly via email (liran.tal@gmail.com), or Twitter (https://twitter.com/liran_tal).
